---
title: Point cloud for classification
tags:
  - Point cloud
---

## State of the art networks for different tasks
1. [paperswithcode](https://paperswithcode.com/sota)


## Ranking of point cloud classification networks
1. [3D Point Cloud Classification](https://paperswithcode.com/task/3d-point-cloud-classification)

From the above link, it is observed that the most pupular datasets for point cloud classification is [**MOdelNet40**](https://modelnet.cs.princeton.edu/) and [**ScanObjectNN**](https://hkust-vgd.github.io/scanobjectnn/).

For **MOdelNet40** (released in 2015), in the top 10 networks, I first exclude the networks with extra training dataset, I can obtain:
- PointView-GCN
- RepSurf-U
- PointMLP+HyCoRe
- PointMLP
- PointNet2+PointCMT
- CurveNet
- RPNet

They are all published in 2021 or 2022.

For **ScanObjectNN** (released in 2019), I first exclude the networks with extra training dataset, I can obtain:
- PointNeXt+Local
- PointNeXt+GAM
- PointNeXt+HyCoRe
- PointNeXt
- PointStack

They are all published in 2022.

Why the top networks for two datasets are so different? Which network should I choose for my dataset (PFT regression from binary vessel tree)?

`ModelNet40` is synthetic, while `ScanObjectNN` is real-world dataset.

So I prefer to try the top networks in `ScanObjectNN`, which includes:
- PointNet
- PointNet++
- PointCNN
- PointMLP
- PointNeXt
- PointNeXt+Local (idea is clear, but code seems not complete)


## Different networks for point cloud classification

- PointNet. Processed raw point sets through Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs). While aggregating features at the global level using max-pooling
operation, lost valuable local geometric information. 

- PointNet++. employed ball querying and k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) querying to query
local neighborhoods to extract local semantic information. **But** it still lost contextual information due to the max-pooling operation

- PointNeXt. 
  - Data augmentation
  -  we find that neither appending more SA
blocks nor using more channels leads to a noticeable improvement in accuracy, while causing a
significant drop in throughput

- PointNeXt+Local. In previous paper, once the local features are obtained, the original neighborhood
points, the directional vectors, and the distance computed (in the case of ball querying)
are discarded. In
this paper, we use the **radius-normalized distance and directional vectors as additional
local neighborhood features** with minimal additional memory or computational costs.




